---
title: 'Recent life and career updates'
date: 2025-02-17
permalink: /posts/2025/02/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - SIMAX
  - SIAM MDS 2024
  - New job
---

It's been a minute since I updated this site! Take this first blog post as a sign of life. :)

I’ve experienced many changes in my life over the past two years, but I’m aiming to become more active in research again in 2025. Here are few key updates:

- (2025) Our paper "A Semidefinite Relaxation for Sums of Heterogeneous Quadratic Forms on the Stiefel Manifold" has recently been accepted for publication in SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications! The most up-to-date version will be posted to arxiv as well shortly. I'm grateful to my coauthors Sam Burer and Laura Balzano for all their efforts to help pull this project past the finish line!

- (2024) Last year I moved to Cambridge, MA, and joined MIT Lincoln Laboratory as a Member of Technical Staff. While my research still largely grounds itself in optimization and signal processing, my horizons are broadening to study [model-based deep learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04469) for difficult problems in RF applications where handcrafted models are too brittle or not feasible given very limited a priori knowledge about the system. I'm excited for the possibilities ahead!

- (2024) I had a wonderful time attending the [SIAM Mathematics of Data Science 2024 Conference](https://www.siam.org/conferences-events/past-event-archive/mds24/) in Atlanta, GA. While I didn't present this year, I enjoyed the opportunity to unplug from my own work for the week and absorb all the latest research in machine learning, optimization, and data science. Plus, it was fun running into my PhD advisor, [Laura Balzano](https://web.eecs.umich.edu/~girasole/)! :) 


